---
title: 'anywidget: reusable widgets for interactive analysis and visualization in computational notebooks'
tags:
  - Computational notebooks
  - Jupyter
  - Python
  - R
  - JavaScript
  - Data visualization
  - Interactive computing
authors:
  - name: Trevor Manz
    email: trevor.j.manz@gmail.com
    orcid: 0000-0001-7694-5164
    affiliation: 1
    corresponding: true
  - name: Nezar Abdennur
    email: nezar.abdennur@umassmed.edu
    orcid: 0000-0001-5814-0864
    affiliation: "2, 3"
  - name: Nils Gehlenborg
    email: nils@hms.harvard.edu
    orcid: 0000-0003-0327-8297
    affiliation: 1
affiliations:
  - name: Department of Biomedical Informatics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA
    index: 1
  - name: Department of Genomics and Computational Biology, UMass Chan Medical School, Worcester, MA, USA
    index: 2
  - name: Department of Systems Biology, UMass Chan Medical School, Worcester, MA, USA
    index: 3
date: 05 June 2023
bibliography: paper.bib
exports:
  - format: typst
  - template: lapreprint-typst
---

# Summary

The **anywidget** project provides a specification and toolset for portable and
reusable web-based widgets in interactive computing environments
(\autoref{fig:overview}). First, it defines a standard for widget front-end
code based on the web browser's native module system. Second, it provides tools
to author, distribute, and execute these modules across web-based computing
platforms. Since its release a year and a half ago, anywidget has steadily
gained adoption. Nearly 100 new widgets have been created or ported to
anywidget and published to the Python Package Index (PyPI), along with many
standalone scripts and notebooks. These tools cover general-purpose
visualization libraries [@jscatter; @Heer2024] as well as notebook integrations
for applications in biology [@gos; @vitessce; @viv; @cev], mapping [@lonboard],
astronomy [@ipyaladin], and education [@drawdata]. Anywidget has also been
integrated into popular visualization libraries like Altair [@altair],
enhancing interactivity in notebooks and deepening user engagement with
visualizations and code.

![The anywidget project. The Anywidget Front-End Module (AFM) is a specification for widget front-end code based on ECMAScript (ES) modules [@ecma]. AFM can be written in web-standard ES or with _authoring tools_ that support popular front-end frameworks. The `anywidget` Python package adapts Jupyter-compatible platforms (JCPs) into AFM-compatible _host platforms_, enabling Jupyter Widgets to be authored and distributed with AFM. Other _host platforms_ support AFM directly. The _project CLI_ can be used to bootstrap new anywidget projects that are ready to publish to PyPI. \label{fig:overview}](overview.png)

# Statement of need

Computational notebooks are the preferred environment for interactive computing
and data analysis. These platforms provide an interface where users can write,
execute, and interact with code and data in real-time. Notebooks connect an
interactive front end (typically a web browser) to an external system that runs
the code, combining prose, executable snippets, and media. The widespread
adoption of notebooks has driven the development of tools for integrating
interactive visualizations within these environments [@Wang2024]. The Jupyter
project [@Kluyver2016; @Perez2007; @Granger2021] has become synonymous with
computational notebooks, largely due to its widespread success in fostering an
extensive ecosystem of community tools (e.g., for producing books
[@JupyterBookMyst], presentation slides [@Wang2023], and dashboards (e.g.,
[Voilà](https://voila.readthedocs.io))).

Approaches for authoring interactive visualizations across notebook platforms,
including Jupyter, vary widely [@Wang2024]. This inconsistency has led to
fragmented methods for creating and distributing custom visualizations and
interactive components, hindering the development of a composable solutions.
The Jupyter Widgets system shows potential for aligning interactive
visualization systems with the broader notebook ecosystem. However, the
complexity and error-prone nature of authoring custom widgets has limited their
adoption by the visualization community. Widget development is hindered by the
need to integrate front-end code across diverse environments, fragmented
distribution models, and a cumbersome development experience [@scipy].
Moreover, Jupyter Widgets are Jupyter-specific, with the widest support limited
to Python kernels, leaving gaps in addressing new and alternative interactive
computing environments. A universal protocol is needed to simplify authorship
and support an ecosystem of pluggable interactive widgets.

# Overview

## A standard for widget front-end modules

The **Anywidget Front-End Module (AFM)** is a specification for widget
front-end code based on ECMAScript (ES) modules, the built-in module system for
web browsers.

```js
export default {
  initialize({ model }) {
    // Add instance-specific event listeners
    return () => {
      // Clean up event listeners
    }
  },
  render({ model, el }) {
    // Render the widget
    return () => {
      // Clean up event listeners
    }
  },
};
```

Widget behavior is defined through methods for managing a widget’s lifecycle,
such as initialization, rendering, and destruction. Running AFM requires a _host
platform_ to load the module and call each of these lifecycle methods with a set
of required interfaces. These interfaces include minimal APIs for the AFM to
communicate with the host and modify the output user interface (UI).

Importantly, AFM does not impose specific implementations for widget state or
UI management. By making host requirements explicit, it decouples widget
front-end code from host implementations, thereby improving widget portability
[@scipy]. With AFM, developers can author a widget writing a web-standard ES
module, either inline or in a separate file, without a build process
(\autoref{fig:afm-and-anywidget}a, top). For better ergonomics when creating
UIs, developers can introduce a build step targeting AFM to utilize advanced
tools (\autoref{fig:afm-and-anywidget}a, bottom).

![Authoring a custom Jupyter Widget with anywidget. (a) AFM can be authored in web-standard ECMAScript (top) or with a front-end framework using a bridge (bottom). (b) The anywidget Python package allows authoring custom Jupyter Widgets with AFM (top), usable across various JCPs (bottom). \label{fig:afm-and-anywidget}](afm-and-anywidget.png)

While AFM is understood by the browser directly, much of web development today
uses front-end frameworks, such as React or Svelte, which introduce
non-standard syntax and unique paradigms for UI and state management. Rather
than incorporate such frameworks into the AFM specification, the anywidget
project provides several _framework bridges_ to make it easier to author AFMs
using frameworks (\autoref{fig:afm-and-anywidget}a, bottom). These libraries
provide utilities to use idiomatic APIs and constructs to manage widget state
and to wrap those constructs into the AFM lifecycle methods used by host
platforms. For example, anywidget’s React bridge exposes a React-based
declarative hook `useModelState` for accessing widget state and a function to
convert a React component into an AFM export.

There are several advantages to supporting frameworks via bridges. First, AFM
is more stable and minimal because it is not tied to a third-party library or
framework. Second, it gives framework communities the opportunity to build
integrations, distributing the maintenance burden and benefiting from
framework-specific expertise. This plugin-based approach has seen success in
projects like the local front-end development server Vite and the Python Flask
web framework. Third, bridges can be updated and versioned independently from
the AFM specification, meaning that changes cannot break host compatibility.

## Supporting tools and ecosystem

### Custom Jupyter Widgets

The main library for the project is `anywidget`, a Python package that
simplifies the authoring and distribution of custom Jupyter Widgets using AFM
(\autoref{fig:afm-and-anywidget}b, top). Jupyter Widgets [@ipywidgets] are the
official framework from Jupyter to extend notebooks with interactive views and
controls for objects that reside in the kernel. Since widgets are integral to
Jupyter's architecture, they enjoy broad support across Jupyter-compatible
platforms (JCPs) such as JupyterLab, Google Colab, and Visual Studio Code.
However, developing and distributing cross-JCP widgets is complex and
error-prone [@scipy]. Anywidget addresses this complexity by providing the glue
code to turn each JCP into an AFM-compatible host. This compatibility layer
aligns AFM with Jupyter Widgets and the Python ecosystem, making anywidget a
powerful tool for creating and distributing interactive widgets across
platforms. Anywidgets can be remixed and reused with other custom Jupyter
Widgets in notebooks, standalone HTML pages, and dashboarding frameworks
(\autoref{fig:afm-and-anywidget}b, bottom).

### Tooling for authorship and distribution

To make widget development more enjoyable and accessible, the anywidget project
offers additional development tools for widget authors. It allows for creating
widgets directly within notebooks, enabling them to start as prototypes and
evolve into full packages. Aligning with modern front-end tools, anywidget also
implements hot module replacement (HMR) for live code editing development. HMR
dynamically updates widgets without reloading the page or losing state,
improving the developer experience and enabling rapid prototyping. To enable
HMR, developers can set an environment variable in the notebook cell:

```python
%%env
ANYWIDGET_HMR=1
```

Finally, the anywidget project includes a command line interface (CLI) for
bootstrapping new anywidget projects that are ready to publish to PyPI
(\autoref{fig:overview}, bottom). The CLI includes options for selecting
front-end framework adapters and additional tools like TypeScript.

```bash
npm create anywidget@latest
```

### Beyond Jupyter

AFM extends the widget ecosystem beyond Jupyter. Many popular web frameworks
and dashboarding libraries support embedding Jupyter Widgets into their layout
systems and interacting with their components. This support also extends to
anywidgets, thanks to the Jupyter Widgets compatibility layer. AFM also
provides opportunities for frameworks and platforms to add more specialized
support, making better use of their respective internal state management and
reactivity systems. For instance, marimo [@marimo], a new reactive notebook for
Python, has adopted AFM as the standard for its third-party plugin API.
Similarly, the Panel web framework [@panel] supports using AFM to define custom
components.

Efforts are underway to support AFM with other compute backends besides Python.
For example, anyhtmlwidget [@anyhtmlwidget] brings anywidget concepts to R,
enabling reusable AFM-based widgets for R documents and Shiny applications with
bi-directional R-JavaScript communication. Additionally, the anywidget project
implements AFM-based displays for the Deno kernel, a JavaScript and TypeScript
runtime.

# Availability

The anywidget project is released under an open-source MIT license, with all
source code publicly available on GitHub (https://github.com/manzt/anywidget).
The core Python library, anywidget, is packaged and distributed via the PyPI
and conda-forge. The front-end adapter libraries, development tooling, and
project-template CLI are distributed through the npm registry. The Deno Jupyter
kernel integration is published to the JavaScript Registry (JSR). Further
documentation about the project can be found at https://anywidget.dev.

# Related work

Interactive notebook visualization tools vary widely in features and
compatibility [@Wang2024]. Some tools offer rich features (e.g., bi-directional
communication) but rely on platform-specific APIs, limiting compatibility
[@Zhao2022; @Wang2023; @Drosos2020; @Li2023; @Jain2022]. For example,
frameworks like [Bokeh](https://bokeh.pydata.org/en/latest) and
[Streamlit](https://docs.streamlit.io/develop/concepts/custom-components/create)
enable custom extensions, but these integrations are tied to their specific
frameworks and cannot be reused elsewhere. More simple approaches provide
broader compatibility but lack features which meaningfully enrich user
workflows. For example, using static templates or the NOVA framework
[@Wang2022] offers wide compatibility, as the resulting HTML displays can be
embedded in nearly any web-based notebook platform. However, this approach
supports only client-side applications with one-way communication, meaning that
only the initial visualization state can come from the notebook, without
further updates from other cells. Other approaches, like ImJoy [@Ouyang2019],
offer a more unified architecture for building interactive visualizations with
rich features across multiple platforms. However, it is an entirely separate
computing platform with limited JCP integrations, not a framework for building
reusable, modular visualization components.

# Acknowledgements

We thank Talley Lambert for his technical contributions to the anywidget Python
codebase and recognize Jan-Hendrik Müller for his significant community
contributions and advocacy of the project. Our appreciation extends to the
entire anywidget community and the Abdennur and HIDIVE labs for their helpful
discussions.

# Funding

TM, NA, and NG acknowledge funding from the National Institutes of Health (UM1
HG011536, OT2 OD033758, R33 CA263666, R01 HG011773).

# References
